Instructions

I)   Outside software requirements
II)  Starting the program
III) Using the program
	A) The image viewer
	B) The image tracker
	C) The "next image" and "previous image" buttons
	D) The gene selector
IV)  Manual pre-processing
	A) Storage location
	B) Formatting
	C) Step-by-step pre-processing
----------------------------------------------
I)   Outside software requirements

Python 3.6.5
Libraries:
- numpy 	1.14.2
- PIL/Pillow 	1.1.7
- matplotlib 	3.0.0
- cv2 		3.4.3

II) Starting the program

	1) Download and install the outside software requirements in 
	section I)

	2) Visit:
	https://github.com/bdesilets/modeling-expression-OB
	and click the green "clone or download button", then click
	"download zip"
	
	3) Extract the zip file by right-clicking on the icon and 
	clicking "unzip" 

	4) Open the unzipped folder and double-click on the MainGUI
	python file

III) Using the program

	A) The image viewer
	
	The image viewer is the portion of the screen that displays
	the ISH template images. When a gene(s) are selected, it's 
	expression map(s) will be overlaid on top of the template image.
	When the program is first opened, the first, lateral sagittal 
	section ISH template image is displayed. 
	
	B) The image tracker

	The image tracker is located just underneath the image viewer.
	It keeps track of the total number of sagittal section images 
	that span across the olfactory bulb (OB). The image tracker 
	also keeps note of the image number that is currently being 
	displayed.

	C) The "next image" and "previous image" buttons

	The "next image" and "previous image" buttons allow the user to
	cycle through all of the sagittal section images available. If 
	the current image is the last image in the set the "next image"
	button will loop around to the first image in the set.
	Similarly, if the current image is the first image in the set,
	the "previous image" button will loop backward to the last
	image in the set.
 
	D) The gene selector
	
	The gene selector is the box at the center-bottom of the window
	It contains a list of all the processed gene expression data 
	available. To view any combination of genes on the list, click 
	on the gene name to select it. When selected, the gene name 
	will be highlighted in blue. To unselect the gene, click on the
	gene name again. This will remove the blue highlight from the 
	gene name. To visualize the selection, click the green "go" 
	button located next to the gene selector box. Anytime changes 
	are made to the gene selection, the user must click the "go" 
	button for these changes to take effect.

IV)  Manual pre-processing

	If a desired gene is not listed in the gene selector box, then
the user may choose to download the ISH images associated with the gene
from the Allen Brain Atlas (ABA) and incorporate it into the program.

	A) Storage location

	The ABA images directory holds multiple folders of ISH image 
	sets from the ABA. Each subfolder is labeled the gene name and
	contains a set of cropped RGB ISH images.
	
	Similarly, the expression maps directory holds multiple folders
	of expression map sets. Each subfolder is labeled the gene name
	and contains a set of black and white images that are the result
	of running the filter_expression module. The images in these 
	subfolders are the  extracted and filtered expression data 
	of the corresponding ISH image in the ABA image directory.

	B) Formatting
	
	All images in the subfolders of the ABA images directory are
	RGB ISH images downloaded from the ABA's website. All images
	are cropped to 369 x 369 pixels manually. The image should be 
	cropped in such a way that the OB is in the center of the image.

	ISH gene image sets use a naming convention. All cropped images
	use this format: 
	"cropped_Genename_##"
	Replace "Genename" with the shorthand name of the gene,
	including any numbers that designate different forms of the 
	gene.
	Replace "##" with counting numbers starting at "01". Ensure 
	that the order in which you number the images is the same order
	as the images appear in the ABA.
	All of the images for the same gene are placed inside a folder.
	The folder should be named with the same Genename used for each
	sagittal section image within the folder.

	This folder should be placed inside the ABA images folder,
	which is within the main modeling-expression-OB folder.

	C) Step-by-step pre-processing

	1) Go to the Allen Brain Atlas' website for the developing 
	mouse brain 
	developingmouse.brain-map.org/

	2) Use the search bar to locate ISH images for your desired 
	gene. Click on the "gene symbol" of the data set you want. The 
	expression summary map is a heatmap based on the amount of 
	expression the gene shows in general anatomic regions throughout
	the embryo (top) and in each phase of development (side).
	
	3) Scroll down to see specific sets of ISH images for the gene 
	at different ages. Click on a data set, or "experiment" for
	embryonic age 15.5 (E15.5). We are currently using images from 
	E15.5 because it corresponds to a period in development 
	where olfactory sensory neuron (OSN) axons are just beginning 
	to reach the OB, an optimal time for signal guidance cue 
	expression to influence OSN axons. Make sure the images are in
	the sagittal plane.

	4) To view the ISH image set in high resolution, click the
	window expand icon in the top right corner of the image viewer
	on the website.

	5) Once in the high-resolution viewer, zoom in using the "+" 
	symbol and navigate to the OB brain region by clicking and
	dragging on the image.

	6) Click on thumbnail icons to navigate through the image set.
	The current image will be highlighted in blue. Scroll through
	the thumbnails until you see image sections with the OB. Only 
	images containing the specific brain region (OB) are needed. 
	Therefore, not all images shoen in the thumbnail are processed.
	When navigating between thumbnails it is likely that you will
	have to click and drag on the image to center the brain region
	on the screen.

	7) Download images with the OB present in the same order they
	appear in the ABA. To download an image, click the wrench icon
	in the top right of the high-resolution viewer. Then click 
	"download image" and select "entire image" for the 
	"download type".
	
	8) The downloaded images must be manually cropped to 
	369 x 369 pixels (use your favorite image editor, or use a free
	one online). The image should be cropped in such a way that the
	OB is in the center of the image.

	ISH gene image sets use a naming convention. All cropped images
	use this format: "cropped_Genename_##"
	Replace "Genename" with the shorthand name, or "gene symbol", 
	of the gene, including any numbers that designate different 
	forms of the gene. Replace "##" with counting numbers starting 
	at "01".Ensure that the order in which you number them is the 
	same order as the images appear in the ABA.
	All of the images for the same gene are placed inside a folder
	the folder should be named with the same Genename used for each
	sagittal section image within the folder.
	This new folder should be placed inside the ABA images folder,
	which is within the main modeling-expression-OB folder.
	
	9) Now, double click on the MainGUI python file. The program
	will automatically detect and filter the new gene expression 
	data. Progress will be shown on the screen. Once finished, the
	user interface of the program will appear, and the gene 
	selector box will have the new expression data from the new 
	gene you have pre-processed.




	

